add measles outbreak example (#51)
epiverse-trace/tutorials-late: learners/BF_measles.Rmd

---
title: Introduction to Mathematical Modelling of Infectious Diseases
---

# Preface

This document is prepared for the participants of the Outbreak Analytics in R course, 
organized by the Epiverse-TRACE team. Its purpose is to provide a concise 
introduction to the mathematical theory behind modeling infectious epidemics. 
We will use the Susceptible, Exposed, Infected, and Recovered (**SEIR**) model, 
applicable to diseases like measles, mumps, rubella, as an example.

# Scenario

> Suppose a new infection has been detected in a closed community of

Author: Thanks, your suggestions have been accepted.

$\mathbf{N}$ individuals, with the infection diagnosed in a single
individual. The remaining $\mathbf{N-1}$ individuals are all at risk of
getting the infection and are considered susceptible ($\mathbf{S}$). An
infected person interacts, on average per time unit (e.g., a day, week,
or month), with some $\mathbf{k}$ individuals within the community. In
particular, the infected person interacts with

> $\frac{\mathbf{K\cdot S}}{\mathbf{N}}$ susceptible individuals, among

Author: OK.

> $\frac{\mathbf{K\cdot S}}{\mathbf{N}}$ susceptible individuals, among

Author: OK.

whom $\mathbf{k}' \leq \mathbf{k}$ may become infected. If the infection
is highly contagious, $\mathbf{k}'$ will be closer to $\mathbf{k}$, and
vice versa. The probability of transmission is calculated as
$\mathcal{P}= \frac{\mathbf{k}'}{\mathbf{k}}.$ Consequently, on
average, the infected individual will infect
$\beta\cdot \frac{\mathbf{S}}{\mathbf{N}}$ susceptible individuals per
time unit, where $\beta = \mathcal{P} \cdot \mathbf{k}$ is called the
effective transmission rate. This represents the average rate at which
an infected individual can transmit the infection to a susceptible
individual.

> Depending on the nature of the disease, a newly infected individual may

Author: Thanks. Now this clarification has been made in the text.

take time to show symptoms. This time period is known as the latent
period. Susceptible individuals who come into contact with an infected
person and acquire the infection first move to an intermediate state
called exposed ($\mathbf{E}$). T here they (he/she) spent, on average,

> $\frac{1}{\omega}$ units time (the latent period) and then move to

Author: Yes.

the infected class ($\mathbf{I}$) at a constant rate $\omega$. Infected
individuals are removed (either by recovery or death) from $I$ at a
constant rate $\gamma$, with $\frac{1}{\gamma}$ representing the average

> recovery duration. Upon recovery, they gain lifelong immunity against

Author: OK.

the current infection, meaning they do not become susceptible again, and
they move to the recovered class ($\mathbf{R}$) (see
[Figure 1](#fig-seir)).

![](fig/t0.drawio.png){ref-parent="fig-seir"}
![](fig/t1.drawio.png){ref-parent="fig-seir"}
![](fig/t2.drawio.png){ref-parent="fig-seir"}
![](fig/t3.drawio.png){ref-parent="fig-seir"}

> The four classes considered define the $\mathbf{SEIR}$ model. The sizes

Author: Thanks.

of these classes change overtime and thus are functions of time $t$, and
the total population at any time $t$ is
$N(t)=  S(t) + E(t) + I(t)+ R(t)$. The rates of change between these

> classes are captured mathematically through four differential equations

Author: No or with little knowledge

> classes are captured mathematically through four differential equations

Reviewer: So ODE equations might be quite a barrier to this audience? Wonder if we should include an optional primer box (e.g. to break down componenets, and make it clear that dS/dt is the rate at which number of susceptible individuals changes over time, and can write this in terms of people who enter/leave the compartment)?

From experience, applied learners can find the idea of fractions of individuals in compartments and rates a bit non-intuitive, so worth a bit of extra content here I think to avoid losing people.

> classes are captured mathematically through four differential equations

Author: Good idea. This will be addressed in issue #60

as follows:

[$$
\begin{eqnarray} 
\frac{dS}{dt} &=& -\beta \cdot \frac{S\cdot I}{N} & & \\
\frac{dE}{dt} &=&\beta\cdot  \frac{S\cdot I}{N} &-& \omega\cdot  E\\
\frac{dI}{dt} &=& \omega \cdot E &-& \gamma \cdot I \\
\frac{dR}{dt} &=& \gamma \cdot I  & &\\ 
\end{eqnarray}
 \qquad(1)$$]{#eq-s1}

> At time $t_0=0$, there is one infected person ($\mathbf{I}_0 =1$), while

Author: OK.

all other individuals remain susceptible
($\mathbf{S}_0= \mathbf{N} -\mathbf{I}_0 = \mathbf{N} -1$). Initially,
there are no exposed or recovered individuals ($\mathbf{E}_0= 0$ and
$\mathbf{R}_0 = 0$). These are known as the initial values of the system
in [Equation 1](#eq-s1).

> Solving [Equation 1](#eq-s1) involves determining the

Author: Well. We can talk about `solutions` in suggested primer box.

values of the compartments at any time $t>t_0$, starting from the
initial conditions. Since the compartments represent individuals, their
values must always be non-negative. This characteristic is referred to
as the positivity of the solution.

Before, delving into mathematical details of how to solve
[Equation 1](#eq-s1), a few key observations can be made:

> 1.  At the onset of an epidemic, the number of susceptible individuals

Author: I have made clarification for the last point.

    begins to decrease exponentially, while the number of exposed and
    infectious individuals increases. As the epidemic progresses, the
    susceptible population becomes depleted, and the exposed and
    infectious groups reach their peak before starting to decline.
    Meanwhile, the number of recovered individuals continues to increase
    without decreasing.

> 2.  The infection will take off only when $\frac{\mathbf{dE}}{dt} > 0$

Author: begin spreading in the community?

> 2.  The infection will take off only when $\frac{\mathbf{dE}}{dt} > 0$

Reviewer: Can we be more specific in terms of dynamics, e.g. the number of new infections will increase over time?

    and $\frac{\mathbf{dI}}{dt} > 0$, and taking the values of these two
    terms from [Equation 1](#eq-s1) leads to

[$$
\begin{eqnarray} 
\beta \cdot \frac{S\cdot I}{N} &-& \omega \cdot E > 0\\
 \omega\cdot  E &-& \gamma \cdot I > 0.
\end{eqnarray} 
 \qquad(2)$$]{#eq-s2} Adding the two equations in
[Equation 2](#eq-s2), gives
$\frac{\beta}{\gamma} > \frac{\mathbf{N}}{\mathbf{S}}$. At time $t=0$,
we have $\mathbf{S} = \mathbf{N}-1 \approx  \mathbf{N}$. Therefore, the
infection with take off $\frac{\beta}{\gamma} > 1$. This is a very

> interesting observation --It tells that the disease cases will increase

Author: OK. Suggestions applied.

if the ratio of new infections to recovered cases is greater than 1.

> 3.  The ratio $\frac{\beta}{\gamma}$ represents the basic reproduction

Author: OK. Now I have some explanation

    number, $\mathcal{R}_0$, which is defined as the average number of
    new infections caused by a single infected individual in a fully
    susceptible population. $\mathcal{R}_0$ is a crucial metric for
    understanding the transmissibility of an infectious disease. A
    higher value of $\mathcal{R}_0$ indicates a more transmissible

>     disease, leading to a faster spread within the community.

Author: Thanks. Now I have removed the statement.

> 4.  The $\mathcal{R}_0$ value helps to determine the finalsize- the

Author: OK.

    total number of individuals that that will be infected- of the
    outbreak via the following equation [$$
    \begin{equation}
    z = 1 - e^{-\mathcal{R}_0 \cdot z}
    \end{equation}
     \qquad(3)$$]{#eq-fs}

Where:

-   $z$ is the final size (the fraction of the population infected),

-   $\mathcal{R}_0$ is the basic reproduction number, and

-   $e$ is the base of the natural logarithm.

> 5.  Additionally, the basic reproduction number $\mathcal{R}_0$ is

Author: Thank for the suggestion. Now, I have added some explanation.

    crucial for determining the herd immunity threshold (HIT), which
    represents the minimum proportion of the population that must be
    immune (either through vaccination or previous infection) in order
    to contain the epidemic and prevent widespread transmission. The
    formula for the herd immunity threshold is:
    [$$ HIT = 1 - \frac{1}{\mathcal{R}_0} \qquad(4)$$]{#eq-hit}

Where:

-   HIT is the proportion of the population that needs to be immune to
    achieve herd immunity,

As $\mathcal{R}_0$ increases, the herd immunity threshold also
increases, meaning a larger proportion of the population must be immune
to prevent the epidemic from spreading.

# Measles Outbreak in Burkina Faso

## Background

Measles is a highly contagious viral disease that spreads quickly,
particularly in environments where people live or gather in close
quarters, such as schools, healthcare facilities, or densely populated
urban areas. Transmission occurs through respiratory droplets when an
infected person coughs or sneezes, and the virus can remain viable in

> the air for up to two hours. Effective vaccines are available, offering

Author: Well,  CDC and WHO say it.

> the air for up to two hours. Effective vaccines are available, offering

Reviewer: If that's the info, that's fine, but worth a citation?

> an efficacy of 93% to 97%, making vaccination a key tool in controlling

Author: OK. Now, Citaition has been provided

measles outbreaks.

> Given the virus's high transmissibility, even a single case of measles

Author: Thanks

can trigger large outbreaks, especially in regions with low vaccination
coverage. The latent (pre-infectious) period for measles is
typically around 8 days, while the infectious period averages 5 days ([Masters et al., 2023](https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanpub/article/PIIS2468-2667(23)00130-5/fulltext)). The SEIR model in
[Equation 1](#eq-s1) is commonly employed to simulate the
dynamics of measles outbreaks and evaluate control measures like
vaccination

## Burkina Faso Situation in Jan 2024

Burkina Faso, like many other countries in Africa, faces recurring
measles outbreaks. This can be attributed to factors such as limited
healthcare access, inadequate vaccination coverage, and fragile
healthcare systems. In 2023, Burkina Faso experienced a particularly

> severe outbreak, with over 2,000 suspected cases reported ([Crisis24, 2024](https://crisis24.garda.com/alerts/2024/02/burkina-faso-elevated-measles-activity-reported-in-multiple-areas-in-february)),

Reviewer: Throughout the example, we focus on infections - worth making it clear how this might related to reported cases?

Author: .... In these simulations, we will focus specifically on the number of infections, which represents a subset of the total reported suspected cases.

prompting health authorities and international organizations to scale up
vaccination campaigns in an effort to curtail the spread of the disease ([Save the Children, 2024](https://www.savethechildren.net/news/burkina-faso-over-2000-children-diagnosed-suspected-measles-nationwide-outbreak); [The Cable, 2024](https://www.thecable.ng/burkina-faso-records-2000-suspected-cases-as-country-battles-measles-outbreak/)).

We will simulate the measles outbreak in Burkina Faso using the SEIR
model in [Equation 1](#eq-s1). This will allow us to
explore the outbreak dynamics with and without vaccination. For this
purpose, we will use the **R** package `{epidemics}`, which is designed
for modeling infectious disease spread.

## Baseline Model

**Model Assumptions and Parameters**

1.  **Total Population**: The population of Burkina Faso is
    approximately $N\approx 22.67$ million.

2.  **Population Structure**:

    -   **No Age Stratification**: Assume the population is homogeneous
        with respect to age. This means that all individuals, regardless
        of age, have the same susceptibility to measles and contribute
        equally to the transmission dynamics.

>     -   **Highly Mixed Community**: Assume the population is well-mixed

Author: Thanks. The statement has been removed.

        and the transmission occurs uniformly across the entire
        population. Meaning that every individual has an equal
        probability of coming into contact with any other individual.
        This implies that geographic or social structures (like
        clustering within families, schools, or neighborhoods) are not
        considered.

3.  **Initial Conditions**:

    -   A single infectious case is introduced into the population:
        $I_0 = 1$.

>     -   The entire population, except for this one case, is initially

Author: OK.

        susceptible: $S_0 = N - 1$.
    -   No individuals are in the exposed stage at the start: $E_0 = 0$.
    -   No individuals have recovered: $R_0 = 0$.

4.  **latent Period**: The average latent period for measles is
    around 8 days (the time period between exposure and becoming
    infectious), so the transition rate from exposed to infectious
    individuals is: $\omega = \frac{1}{8}$.

5.  **Infectious Period**: The average infectious period lasts for 5
    days, which means the recovery rate is: $\gamma = \frac{1}{5}$

6.  **Basic Reproduction Number** $\mathcal{R}_0$:

>     -   $\mathcal{R}_0 =15$ (for measles this value typically ranges

Author: Well.

  initial_conditions = matrix(
    c(1 - 1 / 22.67e6, 1 / 22.67e6, 0, 0, 0),
    nrow = 1, ncol = 5
  )
)

# Run the SEIR model simulation
output <- epidemics::model_default(
  population = bfaso,
  transmission_rate = 15 / 5,  # R0/infectious period = 15/5 = 3
  infectiousness_rate = 1 / 8,  # 1/latent period (pre-infectious phase)
  recovery_rate = 1 / 5,  # 1/infectious period
  time_end = 120,  # Simulation over 120 days
  increment = 1  # Daily increments
)

# Plot the epidemic curve for susceptible, exposed, infectious, and recovered
output %>%
  filter(compartment %in% c("exposed", "infectious")) %>%
  ggplot(aes(
    x = time,
    y = value / 10^6,  # Scale to millions
    col = compartment,
    linetype = compartment
  )) +
  geom_line(linewidth = 1.5) +
  theme_bw() +
  theme(
    legend.position = "top"
  ) +
  labs(
    x = "Simulation Time (days)",
    y = "Individuals (in millions)",
    caption = expression(
      paste(
        "The dynamics of SIER model with ",
        italic(R)[0], "= 15, ",
        "showing the trajectories of number of exposed and infected individuals"
      )
    )
  )
```

> ## Expected Epidemic Size & Herd Immunity

Author: Yes, that is the intention.

Using the `{finalsize}` package implements
[Equation 3](#eq-fs) for calculate the expected proportion
of the population that will be infected given a specified basic
reproduction number $(\mathcal{R}_0)$. The calculation can be done as
follows:

```{r,message=FALSE,warning=FALSE}
# Loading the finalsize library
library(finalsize)
```

```{r}

> finalsize::final_size(r0 = 10)

Author: Well. You're right in that sense. The key point is to highlight the central role of R0R0​; knowing this value allows us to make important predictions about the epidemic, such as its final size. However, a more detailed exploration of the features of {finalsize} will be addressed in issue #58.

```

For $\mathcal{R}_0 \geq 10$, the results indicate that nearly the entire
population is expected to be infected by measles. The $HIT$ needed to
contains the epidemic is about $93\%$, uaing the formula given in
[Equation 4](#eq-hit).

# Age-Structured Model

The age structure of Burkina Faso is characteristic of a young
population, with a majority of the population being under 25 years old.
According to recent estimates ([United Nations, 2023](https://population.un.org/wpp/); [Central Intelligence Agency, 2023](https://www.cia.gov/the-world-factbook/countries/burkina-faso/); [World Bank, 2023](https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.POP.TOTL?locations=BF)), the age structure
is broken down as follows:

-   $[0\to15)$ years: \~ 44 (43-45)% of the population
-   $[15\to 25)$ years: \~19.5 (19-20)%
-   $[25\to 55)$ years: \~29 (28-30)%
-   $[55\to 65)$ years: \~5 (3-5)%
-   $65+$ : \~2.5 (2-3)%

## **Contact Matrix**

A contact matrix typically consists of rows and columns representing
different age groups, where each cell indicates the average number of
contacts between individuals of the age group corresponding to that row
and column.

> Although we do not have a direct access for contact matrix for Burkina

Author: Thanks for pointing out this new development.

> Although we do not have a direct access for contact matrix for Burkina

Reviewer: I think @Bisaloo is planning this (maybe at upcoming dev day?)

> Although we do not have a direct access for contact matrix for Burkina

Reviewer 2: Yes, this is planned in the upcoming dev day.

(Technical aside: this will be in the contactmatrix package, which defines the new shared class for all social contact data packages, so it can benefit all packages. Even socialmixr, which currently already has this feature, would be able to simplify its code after this is implemented.)

  expand_limits(y = c(0, 500e3)) +
  coord_cartesian(expand = FALSE) +
  theme_bw() +
  theme(
    legend.position = "top",
    legend.text = element_text(size = 10, hjust = 0, lineheight = 121)
  ) +
  labs(
    x = "Simulation time (days)",
    linetype = "Compartment",
    y = "Individuals",
    caption =
      expression(
        paste(
          "SIER model showing the trajectories of the number of ",
          "exposed and infected individuals ",
          italic(R)[0], " = 15 for different age groups."
        )
      )
  ) +
  guides(
    color = guide_legend(nrow = 2)
  )
```

## Effective Reproduction Number $\mathcal{R}_{eff}$

Age-structured models account for heterogeneous characteristics in the
population, such as:

-   Demographic differences in social contacts,
-   Variations in demographic distribution, and
-   Differences in susceptibility to infection.

These factors result in different $\mathcal{R}_0$ values for each age
group. The **effective reproduction number** $\mathcal{R}_{eff}$
represents the overall reproduction number across all age groups while
accounting for these differences. It is calculated using the following
formula:

[$$
\begin{equation}

> \mathcal{R}_{eff} = \rho(C) \cdot \lambda \cdot \gamma 

Reviewer: This is quite a technical introduction to R_eff. Wonder if it's worth referring to the new training materials on social contact matrices for deeper introduction to methods, and instead here focus on conceptual understanding, i.e. can't just multiple mean contacts by beta and mean susceptibility to get R_eff if population age structured

Reviewer: Also, shouldn't susceptibility also feature somewhere, separately from the basic contact matrix?

Author: Good points. These will be address in issue #59

\end{equation}
 \qquad(5)$$]{#eq-reff}

Where:

> -   $\rho(C)$ is the **largest eigenvalue** of the contact matrix $C$,

Reviewer: This matrix is already normalised, right? So if R0=1, it would produce R_eff=1?

Author: Yes, the martix is normalize but for R0 =1, gives R_eff = 0.56...!

-   $\gamma$ represents the **infectious period**, which is the average
    duration an individual remains infectious.

The `{finalsize}`package implements
[Equation 5](#eq-reff), and we can use it to calculate the
$\mathcal{R}_{eff}$ for our age-structured model, as follows:

```{r}
r0 <-  15 #  basic reproduction number

# define the number of age and susceptibility groups
n_demo_grps <- length(demography_vector)
n_risk_grps <- 5

# In this example, risk varies across groups
susceptibility <- matrix(
  data = c(0.80, 0.5, 0.3, 0.2, 0.1), nrow = n_demo_grps, ncol = n_risk_grps
)

# risk does not vary within groups
p_susceptibility <- matrix(
  data = 1, nrow = n_demo_grps, ncol = n_risk_grps
)

# p_susceptibility rows must sum to 1.0
p_susceptibility <- p_susceptibility / rowSums(p_susceptibility)

reff <- finalsize::r_eff(
  r0 = r0,
  contact_matrix = contact_matrix,
  demography_vector = demography_vector,
  susceptibility = susceptibility,
  p_susceptibility = p_susceptibility
)

reff
```

::: challenge
### $\mathcal{R}_{eff}$ vs $\mathcal{R}_0$

How different is the $\mathcal{R}_{eff}$ value from $\mathcal{R}_0$?
:::

> This estimate of $\mathcal{R}_{eff}$ more accurately reflects the transmission potential and can 

Reviewer: Explain why?

Author: OK.

> be used to estimate the **HIT** required for achieving sufficient vaccine coverage

Reviewer: HIT depends on R0, not R_eff.

Author: Thanks. Now the statment has been removed.
```suggestion
Interventions against measles include prevention, control, and
```

# Interventions models

Interventions against measles include prevention, control, and
treatment. Controlling its spread requires a combination of public

> health measures, such as reducing contact, isolating infectious and

Reviewer: Are there any examples of contact reductions in response to measles outbreaks? E.g. school closures? Otherwise might feel quite hypothetical.

I don't think we talk about isolation later, so might be best to cut this or explain why not considered.

Reviewer: Update: 2019 measles in Samoa would be one example where curfew introduced and schools closed: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2019_Samoa_measles_outbreak

Author: Thanks for the example, and opt to cut isolation.

      col = demography_group, linetype = scenario
    )
  ) +
  # Highlight the reduced contact intervention period
  annotate(
    geom = "rect",
    xmin = reduced_contacts[["time_begin"]],
    xmax = reduced_contacts[["time_end"]],
    ymin = 0, ymax = 0.67e3,
    fill = alpha("red", 0.2),
    linetype = "dashed"
  ) +
  # Set axis scaling and formatting
  scale_y_continuous(labels = scales::comma) +
  scale_linetype_manual(
    name = "Scenario",
    values = c(
      "Baseline" = "dashed",
      "Reduced Contact" = "solid"
    )
  ) +
  scale_colour_brewer(
    palette = "Dark2",
    name = "Age Group"
  ) +
  expand_limits(y = c(0, 1e3)) +
  coord_cartesian(expand = FALSE) +
  theme_bw() +
  theme(
    legend.position = "top"
  ) +
  labs(
    x = "Simulation Time (days)",
    y = "New Infections",
    linetype = "Scenario",
    caption =
      expression(
        paste(
          "New infections under baseline and 20% reduced transmission rate (",
          beta,
          ") for different age groups."
        )
      )
  ) +
  # Adjust legend display to fit in two rows
  guides(
    color = guide_legend(nrow = 2)
  )
```

## Vaccination Model

> An effective vaccine for measles exists, known as the measles, mumps,

Reviewer: Do all countries administer MMR? It's a common vaccine but maybe not universal?

Author: Yes, not universal. Burkina faso does administer MMR, now this clarification has been included.

and rubella (MMR) vaccine. The efficacy of the measles component of the
MMR vaccine varies slightly depending on the age at which it is
administered and the number of doses received. For example, the

> vaccine's efficacy is approximately $93\%$, $97\%$, $95\%$, $94\%$, and

Reviewer: Give citation? This is for 2 doses right?

Author: This is intended solely for explanation and modeling purposes, based on data for a two-dose MMR schedule. Now clarification has been added

$85\%$ for the age groups $[0\to 15)$, $[15\to 25)$, $[25\to 55)$,
$[55\to 65)$, and $65+$, respectively. The `{epidemics}` package enables
the incorporation of vaccination interventions into modeling, as
demonstrated in the code chunk below.

```{r}
vaccinate_elders <- epidemics::vaccination(

>   name = "Vaccination compagain",

Reviewer: Typo

Author: Thanks. campaign vs compagain..!

  scale_y_continuous(labels = scales::comma) +
  scale_colour_brewer(palette = "Dark2", name = "Age group") +
  expand_limits(y = c(0, 3e3)) +
  coord_cartesian(expand = FALSE) +
  theme_bw() +
  theme(
    legend.position = "top",
    legend.text = element_text(size = 10, hjust = 0, lineheight = 121)
  ) +
  labs(
    x = "Simulation time (days)",
    linetype = "Compartment",
    y = "Individuals",
    caption =
      expression(
        paste(
          "SIER with vaccine  showing the trajectories of the number of ",
          "exposed and infected individuals for different age groups."
        )
      )
  ) +
  guides(
    color = guide_legend(nrow = 2)
  )
```

We can visualize the outcomes of both the baseline model and the
vaccine-intervention model to highlight the differences in infection
dynamics. This comparison allows us to observe how vaccination impacts
the spread of the disease, particularly in terms of reducing new
infections, altering the epidemic curve, and potentially preventing
outbreaks across different age groups. By contrasting these two models,
we can better understand the effectiveness of vaccination strategies in
controlling the epidemic.

> ```{r}

Reviewer: Something looks odd in these plots - the number of infections is far higher than the other scenarios considered?

Author: Thanks for this subtle error. The `compartments_from_susceptible` argument was `NUll`.

applicable to diseases like measles, mumps, rubella, as an example.

# Scenario

Suppose a new infection has been detected in a closed community of
$\mathbf{N}$ individuals, with the infection diagnosed in a single
individual. The remaining $\mathbf{N-1}$ individuals are all at risk of
getting the infection and are considered susceptible ($\mathbf{S}$). An
infected person  makes $k$ contacts and have a probability $p$ of infecting 
each one if susceptible, and we can call this $\beta$ for short. This represents the average rate at which
an infected individual can transmit the infection to a susceptible
individual.

Depending on the nature of the disease, a newly infected individual may take 
time to show symptoms, known as the incubation period (time from infection to 
symptoms), and time to become infectious, known as the latent period (time from 
infection to infectiousness). The latent period is relevant to the SEIR-type models. 
Susceptible individuals who come into contact with an infected
person and acquire the infection first move to an intermediate state
called exposed ($\mathbf{E}$). There they (he/she) spent, on average,

> $\frac{1}{\omega}$ units time (the latent period) and then move to

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
$\frac{1}{\alpha}$ units time (the latent period) and then move to
```

> the infected class ($\mathbf{I}$) at a constant rate $\omega$. Infected

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the infected class ($\mathbf{I}$) at a constant rate $\alpha$. Infected
```

individuals are removed (either by recovery or death) from $I$ at a
constant rate $\gamma$, with $\frac{1}{\gamma}$ representing the average
recovery duration. Upon recovery, they gain lifelong immunity against
the current infection, meaning they do not become susceptible again, and
they move to the recovered class ($\mathbf{R}$) (see
[Figure 1](#fig-seir)). These are some assumptions for modelling purposes and 
may not particularly reflects the biological underlying processes.  

![](fig/t0.drawio.png){ref-parent="fig-seir"}
![](fig/t1.drawio.png){ref-parent="fig-seir"}
![](fig/t2.drawio.png){ref-parent="fig-seir"}
![](fig/t3.drawio.png){ref-parent="fig-seir"}

The four S-E-I-R classes considered in the $\mathbf{SEIR}$ model.
 The number of individuals in each 
 change overtime and thus are functions of time $t$, and
the total population at any time $t$ is
$N(t)=  S(t) + E(t) + I(t)+ R(t)$. The rates of change between these
classes are captured mathematically through four differential equations
as follows:

[$$
\begin{eqnarray} 
\frac{dS}{dt} &=& -\beta \frac{S.I}{N} & & \\

> \frac{dE}{dt} &=&\beta \frac{S.I}{N} &-& \omega E\\

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
\frac{dE}{dt} &=&\beta \frac{S.I}{N} &-& \alpha E\\
```

> \frac{dI}{dt} &=& \omega E &-& \gamma I \\

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
\frac{dI}{dt} &=& \alpha E &-& \gamma I \\
```

in [Equation 1](#eq-s1).

 Since the compartments represent individuals, their
values must always be non-negative. This characteristic is referred to
as the positivity of the solution. 
Before delving into mathematical details of how to solve
[Equation 1](#eq-s1), a few key observations can be made:

1. At the onset of an epidemic, the number of susceptible individuals
    begins to decrease exponentially, while the number of exposed and
    infectious individuals increases. As the epidemic progresses, the
    susceptible population becomes depleted, and the exposed and
    infectious groups reach their peak before starting to decline.
    Meanwhile, the number of recovered individuals continues to increase
    without decreasing. (Note that these observations  hold true only when
$\mathcal{R}_0 > 1$, as we shall see later in this document).

2.  The infection will start spreading in the community only when $\frac{\mathbf{dE}}{dt} > 0$
    or $\frac{\mathbf{dI}}{dt} > 0$, and taking the values of these two
    terms from [Equation 1](#eq-s1) leads to

[$$
\begin{eqnarray} 

> \beta .\frac{S.I}{N} &-& \omega .E > 0\\

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
\beta .\frac{S.I}{N} &-& \alpha .E > 0\\
```

>  \omega. E &-& \gamma .I > 0.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 \alpha. E &-& \gamma .I > 0.
```

**Model Assumptions and Parameters**

1.  **Total Population**: The population of Burkina Faso is
    approximately $N\approx 22.67$ million.

2.  **Population Structure**:

    -   **No Age Stratification**: Assume the population is homogeneous
        with respect to age. This means that all individuals, regardless
        of age, have the same susceptibility to measles and contribute
        equally to the transmission dynamics.

3.  **Initial Conditions**:

    -   A single infectious case is introduced into the population:
        $I_0 = 1$.
    -   The entire population, except for this one case, is initially 
    susceptible: $S_0 = N - 1$. This 
    assumption simplifies the model and allows us to explore the spread of 
    infection in the absence of immunity. Although real populations typically 
    have some immunity due to vaccination or prior infection.
    -   No individuals are in the exposed stage at the start: $E_0 = 0$.
    -   No individuals have recovered: $R_0 = 0$.

4.  **latent Period**: The average latent period for measles is
    around 8 days (the time period between exposure and becoming
    infectious), so the transition rate from exposed to infectious

>     individuals is: $\omega = \frac{1}{8}$.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    individuals is: $\alpha = \frac{1}{8}$.
```

        per day in a fully susceptible population.

By applying these assumptions and parameters to
[Equation 1](#eq-s1), we can simulate the potential
trajectory of the measles outbreak using the syntax provided by the
{epidemics} package as shown in the below is code chunk.

```{r,warning=FALSE,message=FALSE}
# Loading libraries
library(dplyr)
library(ggplot2)
library(epidemics)
```

```{r}
# Define the population structure for Burkina Faso
bfaso <- epidemics::population(
  name = "Burkina Faso",
  contact_matrix = matrix(1), # Well-mixed population
  demography_vector = 22.67e6, # Population size
  # Initial conditions: Susceptible, exposed, Infectious, vaccinated, recovered
  initial_conditions = matrix(
    c(1 - 1 / 22.67e6, 1 / 22.67e6, 0, 0, 0),
    nrow = 1, ncol = 5
  )
)

# Run the SEIR model simulation
output <- epidemics::model_default(
  population = bfaso,
  transmission_rate = 15 / 5, # R0/infectious period = 15/5 = 3
  infectiousness_rate = 1 / 8, # 1/latent period (pre-infectious phase)
  recovery_rate = 1 / 5, # 1/infectious period
  time_end = 120, # Simulation over 120 days
  increment = 1 # Daily increments
)

> # Plot the epidemic curve for susceptible, exposed, infectious, and recovered

Reviewer 3: @Degoot-AM this episode fits nicely as the summative for the session on intro to idm. For the training session, we can do some sections by livecoding and others by copy/paste. I created this summative code with labels for each https://github.com/avallecam/epicatador/blob/main/74-epidemics-bf-measles-summative.R

In that summative, I propose to make simpler plots (e.g., whole aggregates of new infections). I prefer to keep ggplot2 code as simple as possible (geom only as much), then less noise when showcasing {epidemics}. But better to keep that edit to other PR.

# at random with individuals in group {i}
contact_matrix <- contact_matrix / demography_vector

# Print the contact matrix
# contact_matrix

# Define the population structure for Burkina Faso
initial_i <- 1 / bf_pop
initial_conditions <- c(S = 1 - initial_i, E = 0, I = initial_i, R = 0, V = 0)

# Replicate initial conditions for all age groups
initial_conditions_matrix <- rbind(
  initial_conditions,
  initial_conditions,
  initial_conditions,
  initial_conditions,
  initial_conditions
)

rownames(initial_conditions_matrix) <- rownames(contact_matrix)

# Print the initial conditions
# initial_conditions_matrix

# Create the population object
bf_population <- epidemics::population(
  name = "Burkina Faso",
  contact_matrix = contact_matrix,
  demography_vector = demography_vector,
  initial_conditions = initial_conditions_matrix
)

# Print the population object
# bf_population
```

```{r}
# Run the epidemic model
output1 <- epidemics::model_default(
  population = bf_population,
  transmission_rate = 15 / 5, # R0/infectious period = 15/5 = 3
  infectiousness_rate = 1 / 8, # 1/latent period (pre-infectious phase)
  recovery_rate = 1 / 5, # 1/infectious period

>   time_end = 122, # Simulation over 122 days

Reviewer 3: for homogeneity with all simulations
```suggestion
  time_end = 120, # Simulation over 120 days
```

      col = demography_group, linetype = scenario
    )
  ) +
  # Set axis scaling and formatting
  scale_y_continuous(labels = scales::comma) +
  scale_linetype_manual(
    name = "Scenario",
    values = c(
      Baseline = "dashed",
      "Reduced Contact" = "solid"
    )
  ) +
  scale_colour_brewer(
    palette = "Dark2",
    name = "Age Group"
  ) +
  expand_limits(y = c(0, 1e3)) +
  coord_cartesian(expand = FALSE) +
  theme_bw() +
  theme(
    legend.position = "top"
  ) +
  labs(
    x = "Simulation Time (days)",
    y = "New Infections",
    linetype = "Scenario",
    caption =
      expression(
        paste(
          "New infections under baseline and 20% reduced transmission rate (",
          beta,
          ") for different age groups."
        )
      )
  ) +
  # Adjust legend display to fit in two rows
  guides(
    color = guide_legend(nrow = 2)
  )
```

## Vaccination Model

An effective vaccine for measles exists, known as the measles, mumps,
and rubella (MMR) vaccine, and many countires, including 
[Burkina Faso](https://www.unicef.org/media/155306/file/Burkina-Faso-Humanitarian-SitRep-31-March-2024.pdf),
 incorporates it as part of their 

> national immunization strategy. The efficacy of the measles component of the
> MMR vaccine varies slightly depending on the age at which it is

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
national immunization strategy. The effect of vaccination with
MMR vaccine varies slightly depending on the vaccination rate per age at which it is
```

administered and the number of doses received. For example, let us say the 2-doeses MMR
vaccine's efficacy is approximately $93\%$, $97\%$, $95\%$, $94\%$, and
$85\%$ for the age groups $[0\to 15)$, $[15\to 25)$, $[25\to 55)$,
$[55\to 65)$, and $65+$, respectively. The `{epidemics}` package enables
the incorporation of vaccination interventions into modeling, as
demonstrated in the code chunk below.

```{r}
vaccinate_elders <- epidemics::vaccination(
  name = "Vaccination compaign",
  time_begin = matrix(30, nrow(contact_matrix)),
  time_end = matrix(90, nrow(contact_matrix)),

>   nu = matrix(c(0.93, 0.97, 0.95, 0.90, 0.95))

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  nu = matrix(c(0.01, 0.02, 0.03, 0.04, 0.05))
```
